== IDL ==

All messages sent/received by XBOS procs are described + serialized using Protocol Buffers

- the `.proto` files will be distributed as part of each XBOS release:
    - TODO: should look into enabling GRPC reflection on servers
- Protocol buffers allow for graceful extension and backwards compatibility
- `xbos.proto` defines the top level message wrapper
- Some `proto` definitions have additional meanings:
    - all device messages in `XBOSIoTDeviceState` should correspond to Brick Equipment classes
    - all fields in device messages should correspond to Brick Point classes
    - TODO: achieve this through options/annotations?

== Communication ==

XBOS services make use of both publish-subscribe and request-response communication models.
These models are implemented using WAVEMQ and GRPC, but will be described using a transport-agnostic scheme.

The endpoint/location of a service is described by:

- a `location` (IP address or WAVEMQ URI)
- a `namespace` (root of authority)
- a `service` (pkg name + service name)
- `instance ID`: a human-readable name used to distinguish multiple services
- `signal`/`slot`
- a `method` name

This incorporates elements of both GRPC URL structure and BW2-style service+interface.

| XBOS | BW2 | GRPC |
| --- | --- | --- |
| `location` -- possibly remove this? | namespace + base URI | n/a |
| `namespace` | namespace | n/a |
| `service` | `s.servicename` | pkg name + service name |
| `instance ID` | `instance id` | n/a |
| `signal` / `slot` | `signal` / `slot` | call method / respond |
| `method` | `signal`/`slot` name | method name |

Users will call + refer to services, drivers etc using this structure.
For permissions, this structure will "compile down" into the following WAVE URI structure:

    Namespace: namespace
    Resource: xbos/<location>/<service>/<instance ID>/<signal/slot>/<method>


This should make it easier to develop "templates" for more easily determining what permissions are needed to interact with a service/device/etc.
When client libraries are interacting with these structures, they can determine if they need to dial the IP address to interact over GRPC or if they need to subscribe/publish on WAVEMQ.

== Context ==

- cyberphysical resources represented in XBOS should be incorporated into a Brick model:
    - devices and services can formulate a minimal Brick description of themselves:
        - the device is an instance of `brick:Equipment`
        - the fields it exposes are instances of `brick:Point`
        - fields are related to the device via the `hasPoint` relationship
        - *it is not immediately obvious if there are any other relationships we need to be able to capture here*
    - this Brick description should be published/announced by the process representing the cyberphysical resources (the driver)
- this contextual information can be consumed by databases listening to XBOS:
    - these databases/services should reconcile this information with their existing models
    - combine this context info with other sources?

== Drivers ==

Because drivers interact with XBOS via GRPC bindings, drivers can be implemented in any language.
Drivers should adhere to the design principles here, where possible and appropriate.
We will implement frameworks that facilitate driver development.

=== Reporting ===

A *Driver* is a persistent process providing a read/write interface to one or more physical devices, *typically* over a publish-subscribe interface.
The current state of a device is usually published at a regular interval; for some devices, it may make more sense
to publish opportunistically such as when a new reading is available.
Drivers also publish device state in response to actuation/command messages (see below).

A device's state is published as a message as defined in one of the XBOS `proto` files.
For example, this is the message defining the standard fields for an electrical meter

{{{proto
message Meter {
    //unit: kW
    Double power = 1;
    //unit: V
    Double voltage = 2;
    //unit: kVA
    Double apparent_power = 3;
    //unit: KWh
    Double energy = 4;
}
}}}

The types of the fields (`Double` and so on) are "nullable"; if a device does not expose a field, the driver
simply omits that field from the messages that it publishes.

Device messages are wrapped in the `XBOSIoTDeviceState` message (which is wrapped in the top-level `XBOS`
message), which defines several fields necessary for the operation of the driver.

{{{proto
message XBOSIoTDeviceState {
    // current time at device/service
    //unit:ns
    uint64 time = 1;
    // unique identifier for this request; used to line up with device state requests
    uint64 requestid = 2;
    // any error that occured since the last device report. If requestid above is non-zero,
    // then this error corresponds to the request with the given requestid
    Error error = 3;

    // XBOS IoT devices
    Thermostat thermostat = 4;
    Meter meter = 5;
    Light light = 6;
    EVSE evse = 7;
    WeatherStation weather_station = 8;
    WeatherStationPrediction weather_station_prediction = 9;
}
}}}

Every `XBOSIoTDeviceState` message has a timestamp `time` defined in nanoseconds since the Unix epoch.
The `error` field reports any errors that have occurred.

=== Actuation ===

Drivers can receive actuation messages indicating what state they should send to the devices they represent.
An actuation message is very similar to a reporting message. The top-level `XBOS` message wraps a `XBOSIoTDeviceActuation` message, which in turn wraps the device messages.

{{{proto
message XBOSIoTDeviceActuation {
    // current time at device/service
    //unit:ns
    uint64 time = 1;
    // unique identifier for this request; used to line up with device state responses
    uint64 requestid = 2;

    // XBOS IoT devices
    Thermostat thermostat = 3;
    Meter meter = 4;
    Light light = 5;
    EVSE evse = 6;
}
}}}

*Each* actuation message has both the time the actuation was sent and a request ID. A request ID is a sender-specific nonce that, together with the identity of the sender,
uniquely identifies an actuation message. The request ID is included in the reporting messages to allow the association of a reporting message with the actuation message that
"caused" it.

Recall that drivers send reporting messages in response to an actuation message. The reporting message can either contain the state of the device after a successful
actuation, or it may include an error message revealing why the actuation failed.

These "response" messages should be sent as soon as possible after the actuation message is received and processed.

=== Network Representation ===

How do drivers represent themselves on the XBOS network?

== Local Daemon ==

Single binary that provides most of the functionality needed for the local network:

- embedded `wave` API
- embedded `wavemq` API
- GRPC proxy that provides WAVE auth
- allows libraries to use *both* WAVE and WAVEMQ without running into protobuf import issues
- the API presented here should probably understand the agnostic scheme described in the table above

Additional methods on the binary:

- `xbos cmd`: runs a script with the proper environment variables set
- `xbos daemon`: manages persistent services
- `xbos update`: updates services, etc
- `xbos att`: high level interface for managing attestations
- maybe a self-hosted web interface?
